####################################
Generating planetary systems
####################################

The :class:`~bioverse.generator.Generator` class
************************************************

Bioverse uses the :class:`~bioverse.generator.Generator` class to generate planetary systems in the solar neighborhood. A Generator object specifies a list of functions to be performed in sequential order onto a shared :class:`~bioverse.classes.Table`. For example, a simple generator might implement this algorithm:

- Function 1: Return the `Gaia DR2 <https://www.cosmos.esa.int/web/gaia/dr2>`_ catalog of all stars within 30 parsecs with effective temperatures above 4000 K.
- Function 2: Simulate one or more planets around each star according to the occurrence rate estimates in `Bergsten et al. 2022 <https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/link_gateway/2022AJ....164..190B/doi:10.3847/1538-3881/ac8fea>`_.
- Function 3: Evaluate the mass of each planet based on its radius and the mass-radius relationship published by `Wolfgang et al. (2016) <https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2016ApJ...825...19W/abstract>`_.

The generator will feed the output of Function 1 into Function 2, then the output of Function 2 into Function 3, and finally will return the output of Function 3 (i.e. a table of planets with known masses, radii, orbital properties, and host star properties).

Bioverse "ships" with two Generators: one for transit mode, and the other for imaging mode. The primary difference between the two is that the former uses the `Chabrier (2003) <https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2003PASP..115..763C/abstract>`_ stellar mass function to generate host stars, while the latter uses an optimized host star catalog for the LUVOIR direct imaging mission (see the `LUVOIR Final Report <https://arxiv.org/abs/1912.06219>`_). The following code demonstrates how to simulate a sample of planets using the imaging mode Generator:

.. code-block:: python

    from bioverse.generator import Generator
    generator = Generator('imaging')
    sample = generator.generate()

We can inspect the Generator to see which functions it implements:

.. code-block:: python

    # List the generator's steps
    generator
        
    Generator with 12 steps:
    0: Function 'read_stellar_catalog' with ...
    ...

The exact step count and function names depend on the saved generator template; imaging mode uses a LUVOIR-style catalog and SAG13 occurrence rates.

Each of these functions is documented under the :mod:`~bioverse.functions` module. For the full autogenerated API (all built-in step functions in one place), see :doc:`apidoc/bioverse.functions`.

Managing the step sequence
**************************

The following methods modify the ordered list of steps:

- :meth:`~bioverse.generator.Generator.insert_step` — insert a function (by name, callable, or ``filename=`` path) at an optional index.
- :meth:`~bioverse.generator.Generator.remove_step` — remove by index, or pass ``old_function='name'`` to remove by function name.
- :meth:`~bioverse.generator.Generator.replace_step` — replace the step at a given index with a new function.

Setting keyword arguments with ``set_args``
*******************************************

:meth:`~bioverse.generator.Generator.set_args` sets default keyword arguments on every step that declares them. **Call ``set_args`` before** :meth:`~bioverse.generator.Generator.generate` when you want those values stored on the generator object for reproducibility and inspection.

.. literalinclude:: examples/example_gen_set_args.py
   :language: python
   :lines: 11-31

Starting from an existing table
*******************************

:meth:`~bioverse.generator.Generator.generate` accepts an optional first argument ``d`` — a :class:`~bioverse.classes.Table`. Use this when a previous stage (often a :class:`~bioverse.generator.Pre_Generator`) already built the star catalog or other columns. The ``idx_start`` argument skips the first *n* steps when the initial table already reflects their work.

The :class:`~bioverse.generator.Pre_Generator` class
****************************************************

:class:`~bioverse.generator.Pre_Generator` is a small subclass of :class:`~bioverse.generator.Generator` for workflows where some steps should run only **once** (for example reading a large catalog) before a loop or Monte Carlo ensemble. The syntax matches :class:`~bioverse.generator.Generator`.

.. literalinclude:: examples/test_pre_generator.py
   :language: python
   :lines: 12-28

Passing keyword arguments
*************************

Many of the functions in the Generator accept keyword arguments that affect the properties of the simulated sample. For example, the :func:`~bioverse.functions.create_planets_bergsten` function scales the planet occurrence rates uniformly in response to its keyword argument ``f_eta``. To change the value of ``f_eta``, simply pass it to :func:`~bioverse.generator.Generator.generate` as follows:

.. code-block:: python
    
    sample = generator.generate(f_eta=1.5)

Note that this value will be passed to any function in the generator for which ``f_eta`` is an argument. This can be useful for sharing arguments across multiple functions, but be careful not to accidentally use the same keywords for two different functions.

Transit mode
************

One of Bioverse's main functions is to evaluate the sample size of a transiting exoplanet survey. However, most planets do not transit their stars, so simulating their properties would be inefficient. The argument ``transit_mode`` can be used to address this:

.. code-block:: python

    sample = generator.generate(transit_mode=True)

If ``True``, then only planets that transit their stars are simulated.

.. _adding-steps:

Adding custom functions
***********************

You can extend a generator by writing your own functions to simulate new planetary properties. Each function must accept a :class:`~bioverse.classes.Table` as its first and only required argument, can accept any number of keyword arguments, and must return a Table as its only return value.

For example, the following function will assign a random ocean covering fraction to Earth-sized planets in the habitable zone (exo-Earth candidates or "EECs"), while non-EECs will have no oceans.

.. code-block:: python

    def make_oceans(table, f_ocean_min=0.05, f_ocean_max=0.8):
        # f_ocean=0 for all planets
        table['f_ocean'] = np.zeros(len(table))

        # f_ocean_min < f_ocean < f_ocean_max for EECs
        EECs = table['EEC']
        table['f_ocean'][EECs] = np.random.uniform(f_ocean_min, f_ocean_max, EECs.sum())

        return table

Either of the following works:

    a) Save this function in ``custom.py`` and insert it into the Generator as follows:

    .. code-block:: python

        generator.insert_step('make_oceans')

    b) Insert the function itself:

    .. code-block:: python

        generator.insert_step(make_oceans)

    c) Provide function name and path to the file containing the function:

    .. code-block:: python

        generator.insert_step('make_oceans', filename='rel/or/abs/path/to/file/myfunctions.py')

With the custom function loaded, we can simulate a sample of planets with oceans for arbitrary values of ``f_ocean_min`` and ``f_ocean_max``:

.. code-block:: python

    sample = generator.generate(f_ocean_min=0.3, f_ocean_max=0.7)

You might also want to replace an existing step in the Generator with your own alternative. For example, suppose we want to replace the function that assigns planet masses (step 4: :func:`~bioverse.functions.assign_mass`) with one that implements the mass-radius relationship of `Weiss & Marcy (2014) <https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2014ApJ...783L...6W/abstract>`_. Define a custom function :func:`Weiss_Marcy_2014`, add it to ``custom.py`` (or pass the callable), then:

.. code-block:: python

    generator.replace_step('Weiss_Marcy_2014', idx=4)
    
Note that the function :func:`Weiss_Marcy_2014` should also compute the density and surface gravity of each planet as :func:`~bioverse.functions.assign_mass` currently does.

Saving and loading
******************

You can save the modified version of a Generator under a new name:

.. code-block:: python
    
    generator.save('imaging_with_oceans')

and load it as follows:

.. code-block:: python

    generator = Generator('imaging_with_oceans')
